The Big Falcon Rocket (officially shortened to BFR) is a privately funded fully reusable launch vehicle and spacecraft system in development by SpaceX. The overall space vehicle architecture includes both launch vehicles and spacecraft, as well as ground infrastructure for rapid launch and relaunch, and zero-gravity propellant transfer technology to be deployed in low Earth orbit (LEO). The payload capacity to Earth orbit of at least 100,000 kg (220,000 lb) makes BFR a super heavy-lift launch vehicle. The first orbital flight is tentatively planned for 2020.

SpaceX has been developing a super heavy-lift launch vehicle for many years, with the exact design and nomenclature of the vehicle undergoing multiple revisions over time. Before 2016, the vehicle was referred to as the Mars Colonial Transporter (MCT), though very few details about the design of the MCT were ever made public. Starting from 2016, SpaceX began sharing annual updates with the public, detailing the designs and uses of their upcoming new launch vehicle. In 2016, SpaceX CEO Elon Musk presented the vehicle at the International Astronautical Congress as the ITS launch vehicle, forming a core part of Musk's comprehensive vision for an Interplanetary Transport System (ITS). The ITS vehicle had a 12-meter (39 ft) core diameter, but was only intended for interplanetary travel. In September 2017, the design (now known as the BFR) was scaled down to 9 meters (30 ft). While the ITS had been solely aimed at Mars transit and other interplanetary uses, SpaceX pivoted to a plan that would support all SpaceX launch service provider capabilities with a single set of 9-meter vehicles: Earth orbit, lunar orbit, Interplanetary spaceflight, and potentially, even intercontinental passenger transport on Earth. In September 2018, a redesign of the second stage was announced, adding steerable canards, two radially adjustable fins also acting as landing legs, and a third leg that looks like a vertical stabilizer but has no aerodynamic function due to the special re-entry profile of the spacecraft.

The launch vehicle design is dependent on the concurrent development work on the Raptor rocket engines, which are cryogenic methalox-fueled engines to be used for both stages of the BFR launch vehicle. Development on the Raptor began in 2012, leading to engine testing which began in 2016.

The BFR system is intended to completely replace all of SpaceX's existing space hardware (the Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy launch vehicles, and the Dragon spacecraft), initially aiming at the Earth-orbit launch market, but explicitly adding substantial capability to support long-duration spaceflight in the cislunar and Mars transport flight environments.