Elementary Considerations on the Interpretation of the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics by Albert Einstein.
What I find odd about the present situation is as follows There are no doubts about the mathematical formalism of the theory , but about the physical interpretation of its statements .
What is the relationship of the ψ-function to the facts of a concrete single case , that is , to the individual situation of an isolated system ?
In other words What does the ψ-function say about the individual ?
Then one can wonder , whether one can assign any meaning to this question .
One can of course assume the following standpoint Only the result of an individual observation is , not a result objectively existing in time and space , independently of the act of observation .
When one takes this clear positivist standpoint , one does not need to give any thought to the question what the state” is to be taken as , within the framework of the quantum theory .
The effort then seems like a fencing-match with a ghost .
This neatly positivist standpoint , when logically carried forward , has a irreparable weakness it leads to the conclusion that all verbally expressible statements are declared to be devoid of meaning .
Does one have a right to declare that the result of an individual observation makes sense , that is , is true or false ?
Can such a description not be based on falsehood , or experiences that we can regard as recollections of a dream or as hallucinations ?
Does the difference between waking and dream experiences have any objective sense at all ?
Finally , what remain as are only the experiences of a residual , without any possibility of saying anything at all about them , since they turn out to be senseless without exception , in the concepts used in statements , according to the positivist approach .
In reality , the independent concepts and conceptual systems used in our statements are human creations , self-made tools , whose validation and value ultimately rests on the fact that they help us to order our experiences convenience turn out to be true .
Expressed otherwise , these tools are justified to the extent that make it possible to experiences .
The validity of concepts and conceptual systems should be judged from the standpoint of out to be true alone .
This applies also to the concepts reality” , of the external world” , state of a system” .
A priori there is no justification to postulate them as being logically necessary , or to rule them out .
It is only whether they turn out to be true , that decides their validity .
Behind these word-symbols stands a programme , which has gained unquestioned standing with the development of physical thinking until the establishment of the quantum theory .
It should all be reduced to conceptual objects from the space-time sphere , and to the legitimate relationships that are supposed to be valid for them .
Nothing enters this description which applies to an empirical knowledge regarding these objects .
To the moon at all times Footnote Emphasis added by translator .
The original text simply has the word in parentheses 1 At the basis of the linguistic affinity of the concepts and out to be true lies a fundamental relationship .
This idea must not be misunderstood in a utilitarian sense .
Footnote The original text simply has the words and in quotes .
a position in space with respect to a coordinate system in use is attributed , independent of whether perceptions of this position exist or not .
This is the kind of description one has in mind , when one speaks of the physical description of the world” , whatever the choice of the elementary building blocks material points , field , etc. that may be taken as the basis of such a description .
The validation of this programme was not seriously doubted by physicists so long as it seemed that everything entering into such a description , could in principle be confirmed empirically in every case .
That this was an illusion was first proven in the realm of quantum phenomena by Heisenberg in a manner that was convincing to physicists .
The concept reality was now felt to be problematic , and the question arose as to what it was exactly that theoretical physics through quantum mechanics sought to describe , and to what the laws that physics established applied to .
This question was answered variously .
To arrive nearer to an answer , we consider what quantum mechanics has to say about macro-systems , that is , about such objects , which we experience as perceivable” .
About such objects we know that they and the laws that apply to them can be represented by classical physics to great , if not unlimited , accuracy .
We do not doubt that for such objects at all times , there is a real space configuration position as well as a velocity a momentum , that is , a real situation all with the approximation required by the quantum structure .
We ask Does quantum mechanics with the expected approximations imply the real description provided by classical mechanics for macroscopic objects ?
Or if this question cannot be answered with a simple , in which sense is this the case ?
We will reflect on these questions with a specific example .
The Specific Example The system , consisting of a bullet of around 1 mm in diameter , moving to and fro between two parallel walls , which are about 1 meter apart along the x-axis of a certain coordinate system . 
The collisions are supposed to be elastic .
In this idealized macro-system , we regard the walls as being replaced by decaying potential energy expressions , into which enter only the coordinates of the material particles constituting the bullet .
Care is taken to ensure that the processes of reflection do not give rise to any coupling between the center-ofmass coordinate x of the bullet and coordinates including the angle coordinates .
Thus we are able to specify the position of the bullet aside from its radius through x alone , for our purposes .
In the quantum-mechanical sense , a process of well-defined energy is involved .
The de Broglie wave is harmonic in the time coordinate .
Further , it differs from 0 only between x = 2l and x = 2l .
At the endpoints of the path , continuity with the vanishing of the ψ-function outside the path is achieved by the requirement that for x = 2l , it must be true that ψ = 0.
The ψ-function is then a standing wave , which inside the path can be rep resented as the superposition of two harmonic waves propagating in opposite directions 1a ψ = A + A or ψ = A expiat cos bx 1b From 1a we see that the factor A in both terms must be chosen to be the same , so that the boundary conditions at the ends can be satisfied .
A can be chosen to be real without loss of generality .
b is determined according to the equation , via the mass m .
We regard the factor A as normalized in the well-known manner .
In order that a comparison with the example with the corresponding classical problem be fruitful , we must also require that the de Broglie wavelength 2π b be small in comparison to l .
First of all , as is customary in the light of probabilistic interpretation of the significance of the ψ-function , we set W = ψ = A2 cos2 That is the probability that the center-of-mass coordinate x of the bullet lies in a given interval .
Apart from an undulatory , whose physical reality is certain , it is a simple constant times .
What about the probabilities of the values of momentum and velocities of the bullet ?
These probabilities are obtained from the Fourier-decomposition of ψ .
If equation 1 were valid from to , then it would already have been the desired Fourier-decomposition .
There would then have been two equally probable , sharply defined momenta which would have been equal but opposite .
However , since both wavetrains are bounded , the term they each contribute is a continuum Fourier-decomposition whose spectral region is narrower , the greater the value of the de Broglie wavelength contained in the region l .
This follows from the fact that only two nearly sharp equal and opposite values of momentum are possible - which values incidentally coincide with that of the classical case , and which both have equal probability .
Both these statistical results are apart from the small variations which are required by the quantum structure , which apply to a time ensemble of systems in the case of a classical theory .
In this respect the theory is fully satisfactory .
However we now ask ourselves Can this theory provide a real description of an individual case ?
This question must be answered with a .
In deciding this it is important that we are dealing with a .
Since for a macro-system we are sure that it is at any time in a state” which is described approximately correctly by classical mechanics .
The individual macrosystem of the kind we have considered also has a nearly well-defined center-ofmass coordinate at all times at least averaged over a small time interval and a nearly well-defined momentum determined with respect to the choice .
Neither of these two pieces of information can be arrived at via the ψ-function 1 .
From the ψ-function , only such information can be extracted which pertain to a statistical ensemble of systems of the type under consideration .
That for a macro-system under consideration , not every ψ-function satisfying the equation approximately corresponds to the real description in a classical mechanical sense , becomes particularly obvious when we consider a ψ-function , which is made up of the superposition of two solutions of type 1 , but whose frequencies or energies differ considerably from one another .
Then such a superposition does not correspond to any real classical mechanical state at all but to a statistical ensemble of such real states in the sense of interpretation . 
Summing it all up , we conclude Quantum Mechanics describes ensembles of systems , not an individual system .
In this sense , the description by means of the ψ-function is an incomplete description of a single system , and not a description of its real state .
Remark The following objection can be raised against this conclusion The case we have considered of extreme sharpness of frequency is a limiting case , for which probably the requirement of similarity with a classical mechanical problem can break down .
When one allows a finite if small region of frequency in time , then by means of a suitable choice of amplitudes and phases of ψ-functions , one can arrive at a ψ-function that is approximately localized in position and momentum .
Can one not try to limit the allowed ψ-functions according to this viewpoint , and arrange for the allowed ψ-functions to be a representation of a single system ?
Such a possibility must immediately be rejected on the grounds that the position-localization of such a representation cannot be achieved for all times .
The fact that the equation combined with the Born interpretation does not lead to a description of the real state of a single system , naturally gives rise to a search for a theory which is free of this limitation .
So far there have been two attempts in this direction , which share the features that they maintain the equation , and give up the Born interpretation .
The first effort goes back to de Broglie and has been pursued further by Bohm with great perspicacity .
As original investigation of the wave equation by analogy linearizing of Equation of Analytical Mechanics leads to classical mechanics , so by analogy should the equation of motion of a quantized single system supported by a solution ψ of the equation be established .
The rule is as follows ψ should be cast in the form ψ = ReiS Thus out of ψ are derived the real functions of the coordinates R and S. Differentiation of S with respect to the coordinates gives the momenta or velocities of the system as functions of time , if the coordinates are known for a definite value of time in a given coordinate system .
A look at 1a shows that in our case vanishes , and with it the velocity .
This objection , which incidentally was raised already a quarter-century ago by Pauli against this theoretical attempt , in very serious when brought to bear on our example .
The vanishing of the velocity contradicts the well-founded requirement that in the case of a macroscopic system , the motion must approximately agree with the classical mechanical motion .
The second attempt , which aims at achieving a real description of an individual system , based on the equation , has been made by himself .
Briefly , his ideas are as follows .
The ψ-function itself represents reality , and does not stand in need of the Born interpretation .
The atomic structures about which the ψ-function is supposed to carry information , do not exist at all , at least , not as localized structures .
Carried over to our macroscopic system , it means that macroscopic objects do not exist as such .
In any case , there is no such thing even approximately as the position of a center-of-mass at a definite time .
Here also the demand that the quantum theoretical description of the motion of a macroscopic system be approximately in agreement with the corresponding classical mechanical description , is not respected .
The result of our considerations is this The acceptable interpretation of the equation is the statistical interpretation given by Born .
However this does not provide any real description of an individual system , but only statistical predictions about ensembles of systems .
In my opinion it is in principle not satisfactory that such a theoretical framework should lie at the foundations of physics , especially since the objective describability of an individual macroscopic system description of the state” cannot be given up without the picture of the physical world dissolving in a cloud , as it were .
Finally , the judgement that physics must strive towards a real description of an individual system , is unavoidable .
Nature as a whole can only thought of as an individual singly existing system and not as an of systems” .
