Heaven Less Opulent Than Vatican , Reports Disappointed Pope .
HEAVEN The soul of Pope John Paul , which entered heaven last week following a long illness , expressed confusion and disappointment Saturday , upon learning that the Celestial Kingdom of God to which the departed faithful ascend in the afterlife is significantly less luxurious than the Vatican 's Papal Palace , in which the pope spent the past 26 years of his earthly life .
Heaven Less Opulent .
St . Peter 's Basilica , with its 90-foot bronze baldachin designed by Bernini , is one of the many Vatican splendors no longer enjoyed by Pope John Paul II below .
Where are all the marble statues , sterling-silver chalices , and gem-encrusted scepters ? the visibly disappointed pope asked .
Where are the 60-foot-tall stained-glass windows and hand-painted cupolas ?
Where are the elaborately outfitted ranks of Swiss Guards ?
Why is n't every single surface gilded ?
This is my eternal reward ? 
Heaven , according to the New Testament , has like a very costly stone of pure gold , like clear glass with twelve gates ... each gate a single pearl . 
Yet the pope , who spoke from the afterlife , said heaven is nothing like the solid-gold city detailed at length by John of Patmos in the Book of Revelations .
Evidently , the Bible was not intended to be taken literally , after all , John Paul II said .
Do n't get me wrong It 's very nice up here quite beautiful and serene .
It 's just not as fancy as what I 'm accustomed to .
If I 'd known heaven was going to be like this , I would 've taken one last tour through my 50 rooms of velvet-draped thrones and priceless oil paintings before saying ' Amen' and breathing my last . 
According to the pope , heaven is merely a place of unending peace and happiness , wherein all the spirits of the Elect live together forever in perfect harmony and goodness , basking in the rays of God 's divine love .
Up here , everyone is equal , John Paul II said .
No one has to go through an elaborate bowing ritual when they greet me .
And do you know how many times my ring has been kissed since I arrived ?
None .
Up here , I 'm mingling with tax collectors , fishermen , and whores .
It 's just going to take a little getting used to , is all . 
The pope said it is amusing to think that he has been waiting for this so-called Paradise his entire life .
I spent almost 84 years reciting novenas and Hail Marys to get to this restful place , John Paul II said .
If I 'd wanted peace , quiet , and pretty clouds , I could 've moved to the Italian Riviera .
Frankly , this afterlife represents a significant drop in my standard of living . 
Well , they always said you ca n't take it with you , he added .
