Although Texans had supported Santa Anna at first, they quickly found out that he did not share their views on government. Once in power, Santa Anna dismissed the Mexican congress and had a new constitution written that placed power in his hands. His actions produced unrest in a number of Mexican states. In 1835 Santa Anna sent his brother-in-law, General Martín Perfecto de Cos, to command troops in the north, including Texas. General Cos’s mission was to enforce Santa Anna’s law and put down any rebellion. Cos sent Captain Antonio Tenorio to Anahuac to complete the fort begun by Bradburn, resume the collection of customs duties, and watch the actions of the Texans.
Trouble in Anahuac began again. Two Texans were arrested for not showing respect to Tenorio. Meetings were held and Texans learned that their state government had been overthrown and the governor imprisoned. Concerned that their rights were being violated, a group of Texans met in Harrisburg. They decided to expel Tenorio and his men from Anahuac. They chose William B.Travis, who had been involved in the first conflict at Anahuac, as their leader.
Travis assembled about 25 men. They traveled to Anahuac by schooner and fired a signal shot to announce their arrival. Many Texans disagreed with Travis’s aggressive actions. They were concerned that another battle might begin. However, Tenorio and his soldiers surrendered quickly and agreed to leave Texas.

The next day, Travis brought Tenorio and his men westward under guard. When Travis reached Harrisburg, he found the people celebrating America’s Fourth of July holiday. Tenorio and his men were treated as honored guests by the local settlers. By contrast, the Texans who guarded the prisoners were treated with disrespect. In doing this, the Texas settlers hoped to show their loyalty to Mexico and their disgust with Travis’s actions.
This event suggests that Texans, whether Anglos or Tejanos, had not yet agreed on what to do about Santa Anna and centralism. Supporters of a free Texas, such as Travis, William Wharton, Robert M. "Three-Legged Willie" Williamson, and Henry Smith, among others, had already decided that armed resistance, and perhaps complete independence, should be the goal for Texas. Those who agreed were called the "war party." Those who favored a wait-and-see policy were termed the "peace party." These two factions were not defined political parties but rather people who shared an opinion on how to deal with the government. The factions would later become even more divided.

Despite their welcome in Harrisburg, Tenorio’s men were marched to San Antonio. Cos demanded that Travis and others be arrested and turned over to him. He also called for the arrest of Lorenzo de Zavala, a Mexican opponent of Santa Anna who had fled to Texas for safety. Although many Texans disapproved of the treatment Tenorio had received, none would agree to allow Travis or the others to be arrested.

As the dispute between Cos and the Texans continued, Stephen F. Austin returned to Texas from prison. The colonists looked to him for advice on how to handle the situation. Before his arrest, Austin had made a sincere effort to become a loyal citizen of Mexico. However, he began to view things differently while he was in prison. He began to see that the differences between the Mexican government and the Texans could not be settled peacefully. After his release, he urged Texans to take action.
Cos and a small army of soldiers moved to San Antonio, prepared to enforce the arrests of the Texans. On the way, Colonel Ugartechea reminded Cos that the citizens of Gonzales held a six-pound cannon. It had been provided to empresario Green DeWitt by the Mexican government for defense against Native Americans. Ugartechea sent an army patrol to seize it. His decision resulted in the first armed conflict of the Texas Revolution.
The Battle of Gonzales
When the Mexican patrol reached Gonzales, Alcalde Andrew Ponton refused to give up the cannon without written orders. The patrol withdrew across the river while awaiting the written order. The Texans used this time to bury the cannon and prepare for the soldiers’ return.
Word spread in the area that the Mexican soldiers planned to return from San Antonio and take the cannon. In response, about 160 settlers rallied in Gonzales and elected J. H. Moore as their leader. They dug up the cannon and prepared to use it when the Mexican soldiers returned. Near the cannon they flew a banner inscribed with the words Come and Take It to show their defiance of the order.
Lieutenant Francisco Castañeda led 100 men to Gonzales to take the cannon. They arrived on September 29 and, seeing the armed Texans, waited on the other side of the Guadalupe River. On October 2 Moore’s men crossed the river and fired the tiny but loud cannon at the Mexican soldiers. Castañeda ordered his troops to retreat to San Antonio. This battle showed that the Texans were becoming more defiant toward the Mexican government and more willing to use military force if necessary.
The Army of the People
When Texans learned about the soldiers in Gonzales, volunteers poured into the area, prepared to fight. When they arrived, the battle was already over. Ready for battle, the Texans decided to continue on to San Antonio to drive the Mexican soldiers out of Texas for good.
Meanwhile, Cos continued his march to San Antonio. Along the way he sent 30 soldiers to Goliad to guard the Mexican fort there. A group of about 50 Texans led by George Collingsworth attacked the fort. After a brief fight, the Mexican soldiers surrendered. This short battle was important to the Texans for two reasons. First, it convinced the Texans that the Mexican army could be defeated easily. Second, the Texans’ control of Goliad cut off a major supply route for the Mexican army.
In October 1835 nearly 300 Texans at Gonzales organized themselves into the Army of the People. They elected Stephen F. Austin as their commander. Austin had been a respected leader in
Texas for a decade, but he did not have any military experience. Still, Austin led the force to attack Cos in San Antonio. Along the way more volunteers joined the settlers, and the army numbered close to 600 by the time it reached San Antonio. When the Texans arrived in San Antonio, a brief fight broke out near Mission Concepción. The Mexican troops retreated farther into San Antonio, and the Texans began a month-long siege of the city. As these troops remained in San Antonio, other colonists met to discuss the changing situation in Texas.

With the Army of the People in San Antonio, delegates gathered at San Felipe for a meeting called the Consultation. The delegates met to decide what action the Texans should take. The meeting began on November 4, 1835. Settlers who belonged to the war party urged the delegates to declare independence from Mexico. Those who were part of the peace party wanted to remain loyal to Mexico but fight Santa Anna in support of the Constitution of 1824.
On November 6, 1835, the Consultation voted against an immediate declaration of independence by a vote of 33 to 15.The next day they adopted the "Declaration of the People in Texas in General Convention Assembled," which stated that they continued to be loyal citizens of Mexico. They declared that they had fought only to protect themselves and to stand up for the Constitution of 1824.They also encouraged other loyal Mexicans to join them in their fight for the Constitution of 1824.
Finally, the delegates set up a provisional government in Texas. They chose Henry Smith as governor. They decided to meet again on March 1, 1836, to make a decision about Texas’s independence.
The Consultation also asked Stephen F. Austin and revolutionaries Branch T. Archer and William Wharton to set out on a mission to the United States to raise troops and money for their cause. Austin’s departure elevated Edward Burleson to the command at San Antonio. The delegates appointed Sam Houston as overall commander of their military forces.

Meanwhile, the siege of San Antonio dragged on, and the Texan army began to drift away. Many of the men were farmers or ranchers who had work to do at home. Since no fighting was taking place, they returned home to their work and families. To make matters worse, the Texans humiliated themselves at what became known as the Grass Fight. On November 26 Erastus "Deaf" Smith, one of Burleson’s scouts, brought news that Mexican soldiers were bringing horses and mules to San Antonio. The Texans suspected that the mules were carrying silver, which Cos intended to give to his soldiers as payment. However, when the Texans attacked, they discovered that the mules were carrying only grass to feed the Mexicans’ hungry horses.
Almost ready to give up, the Texans received some encouraging news. They learned that Cos’s troops were in great confusion and low on supplies. Ben Milam rose at a meeting and asked, "Who will go into San Antonio with old Ben Milam?" About 300 of the 500 men were ready to fight, and on December 5 they launched their attack.
Hendrick Arnold, a mixed-race free man, led Milam’s division into battle and was later praised for his service during the battle. Milam was among the first men to fall, and he later died of his wounds. Fighting proved to be fierce. A free African American, Greenbury Logan, fell shortly after Milam. He suffered injuries that left him disabled. As casualties and injuries increased on both sides, the battle raged on for five days.
The fighting finally stopped when Cos hoisted a white flag of surrender. The Mexican general agreed to give the Texans all the money, supplies, arms, and property held by the Mexicans in San Antonio. He also pledged to never again oppose the Constitution of 1824. In exchange, Cos was permitted to lead his surviving soldiers out of Texas. Once again, Texans thought that the crisis had ended. But Santa Anna had other ideas. He immediately began gathering an army south of the Rio Grande to deal with the Texas revolutionaries.

